=== PAGE 92 ===



=== PAGE 93 ===
hapter
C 5
DRIFT-DIFFUSION MODEL
ThischapterprovidesadescriptionofthebasictheoriesusedinallofCrosslight’s
simulation software packages. The variety of physical phenomena in a semicon-
ff ff
ductorrequiremanydi erentphysicalmodels. However,thedrift-di usion(DD)
modelisthemostbasicsincemanyofthewellknowncharacteristicsofasemicon-
ductor device such as the capability to amplify electrical signal may be explained
usingtheDDtheory.
This chapter will also explain the boundary conditions and basic properties such
asmobilityandpureresistorbehavior.
5.1 Basic equations
The basic equations[1] used to describe the semiconductor device behavior are
Poisson’sequation:
!
X
ϵ ϵ
−∇· 0 dc∇ = − + + − − + δ − ,
V n p N (1 f ) N f N ( f ) (5.1)
D D A A tj j tj
q
j
andthecurrentcontinuityequationsforelectronsandholes:
X
∂ n ∂ f
∇· − tj − − − + = + D,
J R R R R G (t) N (5.2)
n n sp st au opt ∂ t D ∂ t
j
X
∂ ∂
p f
∇· + tj + + + − = − + A.
J R R R R G (t) N (5.3)
p p sp st au opt ∂ t A ∂ t
j
. .
Theseequationsgovernthe electricalbehavior(e g,I-Vcharacteristics) ofasemi-
conductordevice.


=== PAGE 94 ===
92 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
Optionally,twomoreequationsareusedtodescribedthecarrierenergy(w)orthe
carrier temperature distribution. This is not to be confused with the lattice tem-
perature;theformerisadescriptionofhowthecarrierdistributiondeviatesfrom
Fermi-Dirac distribution. Such a model is also referred to as the hydrodynamic
model.
ff
OurtheoryhereisbasedontheformulationderivedbyAzo [2][3]. Forsimplicity,
we only present the equations for hot electrons. The corresponding equations for
hotholesarecompletelyanalogous:
− ∂
n(w w ) (nw)
∇· + −∇ · + 0 + =
S R w E J 0 (5.4)
n c n τ ∂
t
w
5 10
= − − µ ∇ .
S J w nw w (5.5)
n n
3 9
= /
wherewisthetotalenergyofanelectronandw 3kT 2istheelectronenergyat
0
τ
equilibrium. Sistheelectronenergyfluxintensityand istheenergyrelaxation
w
time.
Definitions of symbols are listed in the nomenclature at the end of this chapter.
More details about the derivation and discretization of the hydrodynamic model
isgivenintheAppendix.
Theprimaryfunctionofoursimulatoristosolvetheseequationsself-consistently
,
fortheelectrostaticpotential,V,theelectronandholeconcentrations(n p)andthe
,
electronandholeenergies(W W ).
n p
Fromtheoriesofsemiconductordevicephysics[1]thecarrierfluxdensities J and
n
J inEquations(5.2)and(5.3)canbewrittenasfunctionsofthecarrierconcentration
p
andthequasi-Fermilevels:
= µ ∇
J n E (5.6)
n n fn
= µ ∇
J p E (5.7)
p p fp
µ µ
where and are mobilities of electrons and holes. For convenience, we use
n p
ff
carrier flux density and current density interchangeably even though they di er
byafactorofelectroncharge.
For the hydrodynamic model, the expression for the electron (or hole) current is
modified: (cid:26) (cid:27)
2
= µ − ∇ ψ+χ+γ + ∇ − ∇
J n [ ] (nw) nw ln(m ) (5.8)
n n n n
3
More details about the current flow expression in the hydrodynamic model is
givenintheAppendix.


=== PAGE 95 ===
5.1Basicequations 93
5.1.1 SRH and Auger recombination
Thesoftwaretreatscarrierrecombinationduetodeepleveltraps[Shockley-Read-
Hall(SRH)recombination]using:
tj = − −
R c nN (1 f ) c n N f (5.9)
n nj tj tj nj 1j tj tj
tj = − −
R c pN f c p N (1 f ) (5.10)
p pj tj tj pj 1j tj tj
where n is the electron concentration when the electron quasi-Fermi level co-
1j
incides with the energy level E of the jth trap. A similar definition applies to
tj
p .
1j
Undertransientconditions,thefollowingtrapdynamicequationisvalid[4]:
∂
f
tj = tj − tj
N R R (5.11)
tj ∂ t n p
ffi
The capture coe cients c and c for electrons and holes relate to the lifetime of
nj pj
thecarrierduethe jthrecombinationcenterbythefollowingrelation:
1
=
c N (5.12)
τ nj tj
nj
1
=
c N (5.13)
τ pj tj
pj
OnecanshowthatEquations(5.9)to(5.13)areequivalenttothestandardexpres-
sionoftheSRHmodel[1]understeadystateconditions.
ffi
Thecapturecoe cientscanbefurtherexpressedas:
= σ
c v (5.14)
nj rnj n
8kT
=
v (5.15)
n π
m
n
= σ
c v (5.16)
pj spj p
8kT
=
v (5.17)
p π
m
p
Atrap(orrecombinationcenter)iscompletelyspecifiedbyitsdensityN ,capture
tj
σ σ
crosssections and ,andenergylevelE .
nj pj tj
TheAugerrecombinationrateisgivenby
R = (C n + C p)(np − n2) , (5.18)
au n p i
ffi
wheretheAugercoe cientsC andC dependsonthetypeofmaterialsimulated.
n p


=== PAGE 96 ===
94 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
5.1.2 Carrier statistics
The electron and hole concentrations in semiconductors are defined by Fermi-
Diracdistributionsandaparabolicdensityofstateswhich,whenintegrated,yield
[1]:
!
−
E E
= fn c
n N c F 1/2 (5.19)
kT
!
−
E E
= v fp
p N v F 1/2 (5.20)
kT
whereF 1/2 istheFermiintegraloforderone-half.
For the convenience of numerical evaluation, the approximation proposed by
BednarczykandBednarczykisused[5]:
F 1/2 (x)
≈
(e
−x +ξ
(x))
−1
(5.21)
√
3
ξ = π ν −3
(x) [ (x)] 8 (5.22)
4n o
ν (x) = x4 + 50 + 33 . 6x 1 − 0 . 68exp[ − 0 . 17(x + 1)2] (5.23)
Thisexpressionisaccuratetowithin0.4%oferrorinallranges.
In the limit of low carrier concentration Equations (5.19) and (5.20) reduce to the
familiarBoltzmannstatistics:
!
−
E E
= fn c
n N exp (5.24)
c
kT
!
−
E E
= v fp
p N exp (5.25)
v
kT
TheprogramusesthemoregeneralFermi-DiracstatisticsofEquations(5.19),(5.20)
and(5.21)bydefault.
5.1.3 Incomplete ionization of impurities
The simulation program can accurately account for the incomplete ionization of
shallow impurities in semiconductors. The occupancies f and f are used to
D A
describe the degree of ionization. It is assumed that the shallow impurities are
in equilibrium with the local carriers and therefore the occupancy of the shallow
impuritiescanbedescribedby:
1
=
f (5.26)
D
1
+
g
−1exp[(E −
E )
/
kT]
d D fn
1
=
f (5.27)
A
1
+
g
−1exp[(E −
E )
/
kT]
a A fp


=== PAGE 97 ===
5.1Basicequations 95
where the subscripts D and A are used to denote shallow donors and acceptors,
= =
respectively. Thedegeneracylevelsareautomaticallysetto g 2and g 4.
d a
From the discussions of Section 5.1.1, the occupancy of a deep level trap can be
determined through the trap dynamic equation, Equation (5.11). In general the
. .
deep trap is not in equilibrium with the carriers (ie, the trap does not share the
samequasi-Fermilevelasthecarriers).
From Equations (5.9), (5.10) and (5.11), one obtains the following expression for
thetrapoccupancyundersteadystateconditions:
+
c n c p
= nj pj 1j
f (5.28)
tj + + +
c (n n ) c (p p )
nj 1j pj 1j
In the case of surface states or surface recombination centers, the software allows
forthedistributionofdensetrapsnearthesurfaceregion. Thisprovidesamecha-
nismforthesurfacechargestatesaswellasforsurfacerecombination. Fermilevel
ff
pinninge ectsonasemiconductorsurfacecanbemodeledusingthisapproach.
In a transient simulation the trap occupancy is a function of time, depending on
the trap capture rates as well as on the local carrier concentrations. The program
usesEquation(5.11)todeterminethetrapstatesateachtransienttimestep.
By default the simulation software assumes incomplete ionization of dopants
with energy level defined by the level parameter in the doping statement. The
dopantsofaspecificmaterialmaybeforcedtobefullyionizedwiththecommand
full_ionization.
For a more accurate model of incomplete ionization in heavily-doped semicon-
ductors,theMotttransitionmodelcanalsobeused.
5.1.4 Poole-Frenkel model of incomplete ionization
ff ff
The Poole-Frenkel e ect (also Frenkel-Poole e ect or field induced emission) was
originally used to describe field dependent thermionic emission from traps in
the bulk of an insulator [1]. This mechanism is, however, equally applicable to
incompleteionizationofimpuritiesinsemiconductors.
Under an electric field F, the electrostatic potential near an impurity center is
ff
modifiedandthee ectiveworkfunctionortheionizationenergyisreducedby:
r
qF
∆ =
E (5.29)
PF πϵ ϵ
0
The Poole-Frenkel model is implemented by shifting the ionization energy by
∆
E . The field dependence of this shift introduces some complication into the
PF


=== PAGE 98 ===
96 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
discretized Poisson’s equation. The reason is that at each node, additional work
mustbedonetosearchforthemaximumfieldcomponentsurroundingthenode.
AnothercomplicationassociatedwiththePoole-Frenkelmodeloccursattheohmic
contacts, because the simulator solver is set up such that the built-in potential at
an ohmic contact is always fixed, or in other words, the dopant energy level or
the Imref at the contact is fixed relative to the band edges. Such an assumption
contradicts with the Poole-Frenkel model which changes the ionization energy
andtheImrefsastheappliedfieldisvaried.
ffi
To overcome this di culty, the ionization energy at the contact is allowed to be
shifted to a constant value before the simulation. Without such a shift in the
ionization energy at the contact, the ohmic contact may behave like a Schottky
contactbecauseofalargefixedbuilt-inpotential.
ThePoole-Frenkelmodelisimportantwhentheionizationenergyislargeandthe
. .
temperature is low (e g, 100 meV at 100K). Without such a model, the semicon-
ductormayhaveanunrealistichighresistance.
ff
By default, this model is turned o and can be enabled using the parameter
pf_modelofthedopingstatement.
ff
5.1.5 Heavy doping e ects
The Mott transition occurs at high doping concentrations, when the distance be-
/
tween impurities dopants becomes comparable to the Bohr radius. It has been
ff ∗
shown[6]thatthee ectiveBohrradiusa andcriticalimpurityconcentrationN
B crit
aredeterminedby:
ϵ
∗ = r .
a 053Å (5.30)
B m∗/ m
0(cid:18) (cid:19)
π 1
N1/3 = 1 3
(5.31)
crit 4a ∗ 3
B
ϵ ∗ ff
where istherelativedielectricconstantandm isthecarriere ectivemass. The
r
ionization energy of the impurity as a function of the concentration can then be
obtainedby:
E
=
E [1
−
(N
/
N
)1/3]
(5.32)
D D0 D crit
Asimilarexpressionexistsforacceptors. Thismodelisactivatedbydefaultforall
shallowdopantsinCrosslightsoftware.
The applicability of this model to deeper dopants such as GaN:Mg is not as well
understoodsoamaximumionizationenergyof100meVisusedtoswitchtheMott


=== PAGE 99 ===
5.1Basicequations 97
/ ff
transitionon o . Thisbehaviorcanbecontrolledonaper-materialbasisusingthe
dopant_ionization_modelcommand.
The ionization energy can also be manually controlled by the user to match mea-
sured values. There are multiple ways of doing so but the most convenient
methodsare:
•
The adjust_doping statement in the layer file. This overrides the level
parameterofthedopingstatementgeneratedbylayer.exe.
•
The shal_acpt_level and shal_dnr_level commands can be implemented as
parameter overrides in the input files or as part of a material macro. These
commands are flexible and can even be used to create custom formulas for
theactivationenergydependenceonthedopantconcentration.
5.1.6 Carrier mobility
µ µ
Thecarriermobilities and accountforthescatteringmechanisminelectrical
n p
transport.
ff
Oneofthemaine ectsonthemobilityisthelocalelectricalfield[1]. Thesoftware
providesseveralanalyticalformulasoffielddependentmobility:
• µ µ
1. The simplest mobility model uses constant mobilities and for
0n 0p
electrons and holes, respectively, throughout each material region in the
device. This model shouldnot be confused with constantvelocity: constant
mobilitymeanslinearvelocity.
•
2. Another simplified field dependent mobility model is the two-piece mo-
bilitymodel:
8
>
> <µ
forF
<
F
,
µ = > > 0n 0n (5.33)
n : / ≥ .
v F forF F
sn 0n
= µ
v F (5.34)
sn 0n 0n
for the electron mobility. F is a threshold field beyond which the electron
0n
velocitysaturatestoaconstant.
Similarexpressionscanbedefinedforholes:
8
>
> <µ
forF
<
F
,
µ = > > 0p 0p (5.35)
p : / ≥ .
v F forF F
sp 0p
= µ
v F (5.36)
sp 0p 0p


=== PAGE 100 ===
98 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
We note that this model may be used to approximate a constant velocity
modelbysettingaverylowofF sothatthevelocityissaturatedthroughout
0
theusefulsimulationrange.
•
3. The Canali or beta model[7] is commonly used in the literature and has
thefollowingformforelectronsandholes,respectively:
µ
µ = (cid:0) 0n (cid:1) (5.37)
n 1 + ( µ 0n F / v sn )β n 1/β n
µ
µ = (cid:16) 0p (cid:17) (5.38)
p
+ µ / β
1/β
p
1 ( F v ) p
0p sp
•
4. The transferred electron model[7] or n.gaas model is used in many III-
ff
V compound semiconductors which exhibit negative di erential resistance
due to the transition of carriers into band valleys with lower mobility [1].
Thesoftwarehasimplementedthefollowingfielddependentmodelforthis
case:
µ + (v / F )(F / F )3
µ = 0n sn 0n 0n
(5.39)
n 1 + (F / F )4
0n
•
5.Poole-Frenkel is the name given by Crosslight to the hopping mobility
model commonly used for organic semiconductors; this movement is very
ff
similar to the Poole-Frenkel e ect (Frenkel-Poole emission) in insulators[1]
with an exponential field-dependent term determining the probability of a
highlylocalizedcarriermovingfromonesitetoanother.
Themobilityfromthismodelmaybeexpressedusingthefollowingformula:
µ = µ exp[(F / F )px] (5.40)
0 cr
•
6. Amodifiedtransferred-electronmobilitymodeldesignedforGaNdevices[7].
Seebeta_mtefordetails.
•
7. User-defined mobility model. More details can be found in the reference
sectionunderuser_defined_mobility.
ff
Besidesthefielddependenceofthemobility,anotherimportante ectistheimpu-
rity dependence of the low field mobility [1]. The program by uses the following
formulasbydefault:
µ −µ
( )
µ 0n = µ 1n + (cid:18) 2n P 1n (cid:19) α (5.41)
1 + ND +NA + j Ntj n
Nrn
µ −µ
( )
µ 0p = µ 1p + (cid:18) 2p P 1p (cid:19) α (5.42)
1 + ND +NA + j Ntj p
Nrp


=== PAGE 101 ===
5.2BoundaryConditions 99
wherethevariousparametersarefittingparametersfromexperimentaldatawhich
mayalsobetemperature-dependent. Additionalimpuritymodelsmaybeinvoked
throughlow_field_mobility_model.
Inmanyapplications,themobilityisanisotropicandalsodependsonthevertical
field. A number of vertical field dependent model (such as the Lombardi model)
areimplementedwithinthestatementofmobility_xy.
5.2 Boundary Conditions
The boundary conditions for the electrical part [Equations (5.1) to (5.3)] include
ohmic contacts, Schottky contacts, Neumann (reflective) boundaries, lumped ele-
mentsandcurrentcontrolledcontacts. Forthehotcarrierequations,theboundary
conditionhereisthecontactcarriertemperature.
5.2.1 Ohmic contact
OhmiccontactsareimplementedassimpleDirichletboundaryconditions,where
the surface potential and electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels (V , Es ,Es ) are
s fn fp
fixed. The minority and majority carrier quasi-Fermi potentials are equal and set
totheappliedbiasoftheelectrode:
ϕs = ϕs = − Es = − Es = V . (5.43)
n p fn fp applied
The potential V at the boundary is fixed at a value consistent with zero space
s
charge: X
− + + − − + δ − = .
n p N (1 f ) N f N ( f ) 0 (5.44)
D D A A tj j tj
j
WiththesolutionofV andEquation(5.43)onecanuseEquations(5.19)and(5.20)
s
tocalculaten andp .
s s
ItshouldbepointedoutthatthepurposeofcreatinganOhmiccontactinasimula-
tionistohaveaboundaryconditionwhichdoesnotdisturbtheareaofsimulation
but provides a path for current flow. This is in contrast to the Schottky contact
which can be either injecting or depleting carriers, depending on the polarity of
thebias.
Inmostdevicesimulations,theidealOhmiccontactwithachargeneutralassump-
ffi
tion is su cient as a good carrier injector if the contact area is highly doped or
if the carrier injection requirement is not too high. If the vicinity of the contact
has low doping or if a high level of carrier injection is required, the ideal Ohmic


=== PAGE 102 ===
100 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
contact described above ceases to be a valid model for a realistic Ohmic metal
contact. In such a case, the simulator refuses to inject carriers into the device, no
matterhowlargethebiascurrentis.
To avoid this problem, remember to use high doping in the vicinity of an ideal
Ohmiccontactregion. Otherwise,alowbarrierSchottkycontactmayalsobeused.
5.2.2 Schottky contacts
Schottky contacts to the semiconductor are defined by the barrier height of the
electrodemetalandasurfacerecombinationvelocity.
ThesurfacepotentialataSchottkycontactisdefinedby:
= χ−χ −ϕ + .
V V (5.45)
s ref b applied
χ χ ffi
where and are the electron a nities of the semiconductor and a reference
ref
ϕ
material,respectively,and istheSchottkybarrierheight.
b
Note that this applies only for n-contacts. For p-contacts, this equation needs to
be modified by the semiconductor bandgap to calculate the proper hole barrier.
Thesumofthebarrierheightsforelectronandholesisexpectedtobeequaltothe
bandgap[1].
Ingeneral,thequasi-FermilevelsEs andEs arenolongerequaltoV andare
fn fp applied
definedbyacurrentboundaryconditionatthesurfaceinstead:
= γ therm − ,
J v (n n ) (5.46)
sn n n s eq
= γ therm − ,
J v (p p ) (5.47)
sp p p s eq
where J and J aretheelectronandholecurrentsatthecontact,n andp arethe
sn sp s s
actualsurfaceelectronandholeconcentrations,andn andp aretheequilibrium
eq eq
electron and hole concentrations if infinite surface recombination velocities are
. .ϕ = ϕ =
assumed(ie V ).
n p applied
Thethermalrecombinationvelocitiesaregivenby:
r
kT
therm = ,
v (5.48)
n 2m π
s n
kT
therm = ,
v (5.49)
p 2m π
p
γ γ . .
The constants and provide a mechanism to include any correction (e g due
n p
totunneling)tothestandardtheory.


=== PAGE 103 ===
5.2BoundaryConditions 101
5.2.3 Abrupt heterojunctions
Anabruptjunctionisalsoconsideredaboundaryconditionintheprogrambecause
most physical quantities are discontinuous at the interface. Similar to a Schottky
contact,anabruptheterojunctionexhibitsnon-ohmicbehavior,suchasrectification
ff
e ects.
Thephysicalmodelusedbythesoftwareforcurrenttransportacrossthejunction
is the thermionic emission model [1]. A similar expression for the current flux
acrossthejunctioncanbedefinedas:
= γ therm − ,
J v (n n ) (5.50)
hn hn bn b b0
= γ therm − ,
J v (p p ) (5.51)
hp hp bp b b0
where n and p denote the electron and hole concentrations, respectively, on the
b b
barriersideofthejunction. n andp arethecorrespondingconcentrationswhen
b0 b0
thequasi-Fermilevelsarethesameasthoseontheoppositeside. Theseequations
ensurethat,whenthequasi-Fermilevelsonbothsidesofthebarriersarethesame,
the net current is zero. The derivation of the boundary conditions of the above
equationscanbefoundinRefs. [8]and[9].
Thethermalrecombinationvelocitiesaregivenby:
r
kT
therm = ,
v (5.52)
bn 2m π
s bn
kT
therm = .
v (5.53)
bp 2m π
bp
OthersymbolshavesimilarmeaningsasthoseinSection5.2.2.
Theabruptheterojunctionmodeldescribedhereisimportanttoaccuratelymodel
. .
thethermionicemissionbehavior(e g temperaturedependence)ofadeviceusing
anabruptheterojunctionasameansofcarrierconfinement.
Theabruptjunctionmodelhasitslimitations,however,especiallywhenbothsides
. .
of the junction are heavily doped with the same type of dopant (e g donors). In
suchacase,theFermilevelisstronglypinnedatthebandedgesonbothsides,and
the potential barrier is forced to form a sharp peak above the Fermi level. Since
thepeakregioninthebarrierisstronglydepletedofcarriers,theresistanceisvery
. .
highaccordingtoEquation(5.6). Ifthisjunctionhappenstobereversebiased(ie
thecarriersonthebarriersidetendtobemoredepletedwhenthebiasisapplied),
thehighresistancecancauseanunrealisticallylargevoltagedropthere.
ffi
Fortunately, the di culty associated with a highly doped abrupt heterojunction
doesnotoccurveryoftenneartheactiveregions,becausejunctionstherearerarely
heavily doped with the same dopant on both sides. If the heavily doped contact


=== PAGE 104 ===
102 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
region has an abrupt heterojunction, problems may arise. An example of this is
/
GaAs AlGaAs,whichmayhaveaheavilydopedGaAssubstrateundertheheavily
dopedcladdingregion.
Inmostcasestheabruptjunctionmodelimplementedintheprogramisadequate.
Insettingupanewdevicestructureonemayignoretheproblemmentionedabove
unlessthesimulationresultshowsanunrealisticallylargevoltagedrop. Theuser
may be able to spot such a problem just from simulator’s run-time printout. For
example, if the printout shows shows that 10 Volts are needed to pass a few mA
ofcurrent,itusuallyindicatesthereisabarrierofsomekind.
Byplottingthebanddiagram,itshouldbepossibletolocateifanabruptjunction
is causing this problem. If so, we can replace the abrupt junction with a graded
ff
barrierwithouta ectinganyactiveregions. Usuallyagradedbarrierwithgrading
length of 100 Åor so is adequate to replace the heavily doped junction that is
causingthetrouble.
ff
This limitation of the program arises from the assumption of drift-di usion as
the key transport mechanism. In reality the main mechanism of carrier transport
acrossthethinandsharpbarrierisquantumtunneling.
5.2.4 Neumann boundaries
Along the outer non-contacted edges of simulated devices, homogeneous reflect-
ing Neumann boundary conditions are imposed so that current only flows out of
the device through the contacts. Additionally, in the absence of surface charge
along such edges, the normal electric field component goes to zero. In a similar
fashion, current is not permitted to flow from the semiconductor into an insulat-
ff ff
ingregion;further,attheinterfacebetweentwodi erentmaterials,thedi erence
between the normal components of the respective electric displacements must be
equaltoanysurfacechargepresentalongtheinterface.
5.2.5 Lumped elements
Lumped elements have been created to cut down the number of grid points to
discretize some device structures, thereby saving CPU time. Lumped resistance
might be useful in a simulation of a semiconductor device structure with a sub-
strate contact located far away from the active region. If the whole structure
were to be simulated, a tremendous number of grid points, probably more than
half, would be wasted to account for a purely resistive region of the device. Be-
cause CPU time is generally a superlinear function of the number of grid points,
includingsuchregionscanbequiteexpensive.
Applying this boundary condition creates an extra unknown (V ), the voltage on
s


=== PAGE 105 ===
5.2BoundaryConditions 103
ff
thesemiconductorcontact,whichifdefinedbyKircho ’sequation:
X
− N
V V b
applied s − + = ,
(J J ) 0 (5.54)
n p
R
s i=1
where N is the number of boundary grid points associated with the electrode of
b
interest.
Note that this auxiliary equation, due to the currents inside the summation, has
dependenciesonthevaluesofpotentialandcarrierconcentrationsatthenodeson
theelectrodeaswellasallnodesdirectlyadjacenttotheelectrode. Itisimportant
torememberthatalumpedelementcontactwillhaveasinglevoltage(orpotential-
adjustedforpossibledopingnon-uniformity)associatedwiththeentireelectrode.
The simulator should be used as much as possible to calculate any resistance
componentsthatmightbeincludedaslumpedelements. Forinstance,inthecase
of substrate resistance of a semiconductor device, one could just simulate the n-
substrate with ohmic contacts at both ends. From the plot of the contact current
versusvoltage,theresistancecanbedirectlyextractedfromtheslope.
5.2.6 Current boundary condition
The current boundary condition is a very important option in the simulation of
device. For example, when a laser diode is biased beyond threshold, the gain
and carrier concentration essentially saturate. This also causes the bias voltage to
saturate,whilethecurrentcontinuestorisebecauseofstimulatedemission. Under
suchconditions,operatingthesimulatoratavoltage-controlledmodewouldcause
thecurrenttojumptohugevaluesforasmallincreaseinvoltage.
Insomedevices(notnecessarilylasers),theterminalcurrentisamulti-valuedfunc-
tionoftheappliedvoltage. Thisconditionimpliesthatforsomevoltageboundary
conditions, a numerical procedure may end up, depending on the initial guess
solution, with a solution in either of two distinct and stable states. Furthermore,
/ =
a condition of primary interest is at the trigger point, where dV dI 0, which is
ffi
di cult to obtain with a simple voltage boundary condition. Additionally, it is
nearlyimpossibletocomputeanysolutionsinthenegativeresistanceregimewith
voltageinputs.
ffi
A possible alternative to the di cult situation mentioned above would be to
define a current controlled boundary condition, since voltage can be thought of
as a single-valued function of the terminal current. Such a boundary condition
hasbeenimplementedinthesoftware,asanauxiliaryequationwithanadditional
ff
unknownboundary potential. Like the lumped element case, a Kircho equation


=== PAGE 106 ===
104 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
iswrittenatthecontactpoints:
X
N
b
− + = .
J (J J ) 0 (5.55)
source n p
i=1
Notethatunlikethelumpedelementcase, J isaconstantspecifiedbytheuser
source
andhasnodependenceontheboundarypotentialV (theV dependenceisburied
s s
in the summation). Since the full Newton’s method is used for the solution of all
equations in the program, no degradation of convergence has been observed for
currentcontrolledsimulations.
/
The choice of a voltage or current bias is mostly a function of the dI dV slope;
/
this is explained in more detail in Sec. 4.1. For regions where dI dV is small, the
voltage boundary condition is definitely preferable; this occurs frequently below
the turn-on voltage or under reverse bias conditions. If the opposite is true, then
thecurrentbiasispreferable.
Itisnotuncommonforthenegativeresistanceregimeofcertaindevicestohavea
/
slope dI dV very close to zero. Such behavior should be considered when using
a current source to trace out an entire I-V curve. It might be preferable to switch
backtoavoltagesourceafterpassingthetriggerpoint.
5.3 Pure Resistor Regions and Metal Macros
Forresistorsandmetals,weassumethefollowingconditionsaretrue:
•
Charge neutrality: we assume that the space charge at any point is always
zeroevenwhencurrentflows.
• ff
Zero di usion current: the distribution of carriers is uniform enough that
onlydriftcurrentexists.
•
Equilibrium carrier density: we assume that carrier density stays constant
evenwhencurrentflowssothatnorecombinationoccurs.
•
Uniformmaterialpropertiesthroughoutthelayer.
Undersuchassumptions,thePoissonandcurrentcontinuityequationsreduceto:
!
ϵ ϵ
∇· 0 dc∇ =
V 0 (5.56)
q
∇· =
J 0 (5.57)


=== PAGE 107 ===
5.3PureResistorRegionsandMetalMacros 105
Thesecanbecombinedintoasingleequationbywritingthedriftcurrentas:
= σ∇
J V (5.58)
/
Therefore,onlythePoissonequationneedstobesolvedinmetal resistorregions.
Model History
Crosslight’s metal models have undergone a number of major changes over the
yearssoitisimportanttodocumentthehistoryofthesechangesforexistingusers.
Pseudo-metalsemiconductor
Prior to the 2007.3 version, the standard metal model described above was used
to represent resistors. However, this model had some limitations. For semicon-
ff
ductorregions,thedrift-di usionmodelsolvesthreeequationssosolvingasingle
equation for certain points did not integrate very well other models such as our
small-signalACsolverorthequantumtunnelingcode.
To simplify integration of metals with these models, starting from version 2007.3,
Crosslight’s device simulators approximated a resistor region as a special kind of
∼
semiconductor with a heavy carrier mass ( 10) and very small bandgap (0.1 eV).
Thisapproachallowedthesemiconductortoduplicatemanypropertiesofmetals
including Fermi level pinning. However, the need to define an equivalent carrier
mobility (to match the desired metal resistivity) introduced a dependency on the
carrier density. As this was controlled by the increased DOS mass, there was
/
a mismatch with the conduction transport mass used in the quantum tunneling
formulationwhichrequiredfurthercorrections.
Feedback from users has ultimately demonstrated that this pseudo-metal semi-
conductor approach has its own set of limitations, especially with thicker layers.
As of the October 2014 version, this approach is now considered obsolete and
the pre-2007 standard model has been restored. However, our AC and quantum
tunnelingmodelshavenowbeenimprovedandmaybeusedinconjunctionwith
resistors.
Bandalignment
Starting with version 2013, a subroutine was added to automatically adjust the
ffi
workfunctionofresistorsandalignitwiththea nityoftheneighboringsemicon-
ductor. This was done to facilitate the use of metals which, in most applications,
are used for ohmic contacts. However, since thermionic emission is used at all


=== PAGE 108 ===
106 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
ffi
internalboundaries,Schottkycontactsofpoorqualitymaybeformedifthea nity
oftheresistormacroisnotadjustedproperly. AnexampleofthisisITOwhichcan
be either a p (for GaN) or n (for OLED) contact metal depending on the applica-
ffi
tion: the a nity needed to successfully inject the correct carriers changes greatly
inthesetwocases.
Thepre-2013Schottky-likebehaviorcanberecoveredusingtheno_auto_workfunction
statement. ThismaybenecessaryincaseswheretheSchottkybehaviorisexpected,
ff ffi
when the e ect of the metal’s a nity must be studied, or in thermal simulations
ffi
wherea nityshiftsduetotemperaturemayruintheautomaticalignmentprocess.
Interaction with quantum tunneling models
Oneshouldexercisecautionwhensettingupquantumtunnelingbetweenametal
macroandasemiconductorbarrier. Whenusingthepropagationmatrixapproach,
theprogramusesthedefaultdensityofstate(DOS)massfromthemacrotodefine
ff
thetunnelingprobability;putdi erently,tunnelingdependsonthekineticenergy
of an individual particle. However, the DOS mass is a measure of the shape of
theE(k)dispersionrelationanddescribes“howmany”carriersthereareinaband
rather than “how fast” those carriers are traveling. These two mass values may
notalwaysbethesame.
/
Luckily, the DOS mass is not needed in the current version of the metal resistor
macros and unlike previous the pseudo-metal approach, we no longer need to
calculate an equivalent carrier mobility. Instead, we use experimental data and
themobility-carrierdensityrelationshipiscompletelyabstractedaway:
1
σ = = µ +µ
q( n p) (5.59)
ρ n p
Thetunnelingtransportmassinourmodelisthusdefinedinthefollowingway:
• /
1 Internally, the DOS mass of metal resistor macros is set at a default value
of 0.1 for n and p. This can be overridden by explicitly declaring the DOS
massintheresistormacro.
•
2 The transport mass is calculated using a ratio of 1:1 with the DOS mass.
Thisratiomaybeoverriddenusingthecommandscond_dos_mass_ratio_n
andcond_dos_mass_ratio_p.


=== PAGE 109 ===
5.4BandgapNarrowingEffect 107
ff
5.4 Bandgap Narrowing E ect
Itisobservedexperimentallythattheshrinkageofbandgapoccurswhenimpurity
concentration is particulary high, eg. n > 1023m −3. This e ff ect is so called
imp
ff
bandgapnarrowinge ectwhichisascribedtotheemergingoftheimpurityband
formedbytheoverlapedimpuritystates. Thebandgapnarrowingmodelproposed
bySlotboomisgivenby
( r )
n n
∆ E = E ln imp + ln2 imp + 0 . 5 (5.60)
g ref
n n
ref ref
,
where E n andn represent energy parameter, density parameter and impu-
ref ref imp
rityconcentration,respectively.
Incaseofsilicon,E andn wereobtainedbyfittingexperiment,whichyeilds
ref ref
= .
E 0009 [V] (5.61)
ref
n = 1023 [m23] (5.62)
ref
ff
It should be noted that the bandgap narrowing e ect is doping dependent ef-
ff
fect, whereas the many body e ect, which reduces band gap as well, is carrier
ff
dependente ect.
It should also be pointed out that the macro system in Crosslight software pro-
vides an easy way for user to define any kind of bandgap narrowing model since
dopantdensityisaninternalvariableautomaticallypassedtoanymacrofunctions,
includingthebandgap.
5.5 Trap Models
Adeepleveltraplocatedwiththesemiconductorbandgapisdescribedbyboththe
chargeproperty(deepdonorordeepacceptor)asitappearsinPoisson’sequation
andbyarateequationwithcaptureandescapeterms:
tj = − − ,
R c nN (1 f ) c n N f (5.63)
n nj tj tj nj 1j tj tj
tj = − −
R c pN f c p N (1 f ) (5.64)
p pj tj tj pj 1j tj tj
Traps can be defined as either localized defects using the doping statement or as
an integral part of a material using the material statement. The latter method is
especially convenient when dealing with amorphous materials like a-Si:H. When
combiningthetwomethods,thefollowingrulesareused:


=== PAGE 110 ===
108 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL
•
1. Loadallmacrosandinitializetrappropertiesandtraplevelmodelsifany
materialstatementsdefinetraps.
•
2. Gettrapinformationfromdopingstatementregardingtrapconcentration
ff
and level. This will a ect all materials in a given area since doping is done
atthemeshlevelanddoesnotdistinguishbymaterial.
•
3.
– If (2) exists for traps, we should now have density, level and charge-
types. Calculatecapturecrosssectionaccordingtomateriallifetimefor
trap_1only.
/
– If(2)doesNOTexist,assumealowmid-gapdonorof1.e61 m3. Then,
calculate capture cross section according to material lifetime for trap_1
only.
•
4. Check trap_conc_i commands. If they exist, we ADD that concentration
tothatobtainedin(2).
•
5. Check for trap_level_i statements which override values obtained from
(2)and(3).
•
6. Check for trap_ncap_i and trap_ncap_i statements that override values
obtainedfrom(3).
The software is limited to only a few species of traps (defined by numeric labels)
ff
but a single species of trap can represent many di erent trap levels within the
bandgap. In the extreme of densely populated traps such as those appearing
in amorphous materials, it is more convenient to use a continuous function to
describetheenergydistributionofthetraplevels.
As of the 2015 version, the software supports Gaussian, exponential tail and
uniformtrapdistributions.
Trap Photo-Excitation
When the photon energy of light is less than the semiconductor bandgap, it is
still possible to generate photo-carriers if deep level traps are sensitive to light.
Electrons and holes being trapped in the deep level trap centers require less than
bandgap energy to be excited to the conduction or valence bands. We shall refer
tothisprocessastrapphoto-excitation.
ff
In such a case, the Schokley-Read-Hall recombination terms of the drift-di usion
must be revised to include photo-carrier generation terms due to emission from


=== PAGE 111 ===
5.5TrapModels 109
traps(G andG ):
tn tp
tj = − − − ,
R c nN (1 f ) c n N f G (5.65)
n nj tj tj nj 1j tj tj tn
tj = − − −
R c pN f c p N (1 f ) G (5.66)
p pj tj tj pj 1j tj tj tp
We will derive the generation term G from the consideration that it must be
tn
proportionalto trap density and electronoccupancy. It must also be proportional
to light intensity. Let us recall the photon generation term of direct electron-hole
pairs:
= α
G v S (5.67)
eh g
α
where v is the group velocity of light, S the photon density and the absorption
g
ffi
coe cient.
Inanalogy,wecanwritedownthetrapexcitationtermas:
= σ
G v SN f (5.68)
tn g tj tj xn
σ
where hastheunitofareaandshallbedefinedasthetrapphoto-excitationcross
xn
section. Please note that this cross section times the amount of trapped electrons
ffi
(i.e., N f ) may be compared with usual bulk material absorption coe cient in
tj tj
/
unitsof1 m.
Similarly,trapexcitationforholesisgivenby:
= − σ
G v SN (1 f ) (5.69)
tp g tj tj xp
Toactivatethismodel,theusershouldusethetrap_excitationstatement.


=== PAGE 112 ===
110 DRIFT-DIFFUSIONMODEL


=== PAGE 113 ===
hapter
C 6
NUMERICAL TECHNIQUES AND
3D SIMULATION
ff
Thischapterdiscussesnumericalissuesrelatedtosolvingthedrift-di usionequa-
/
tions on a discretized 2 3 dimensional finite element mesh. The 3D mesh may be
regarded as a collection of 2D planes with carefully constructed plane-to-plane
finite element connectivity. The reduction of 3D into 2D in case of cylindrical
symmetryisalsodiscussed.
6.1 Numerical Techniques
6.1.1 Introduction
ff
All Crosslight software packages involve solving the drift-di usion equations
alongwithafewothers,mostlyrelatedtotheopticalpartofthedevicesimulation.
SinceasubstantialamountofcomputationtimeisspentontheDDequations,we
shallconcentratemainlyonthenumericaltechniquesrelatedtothemhere.
Equations(5.1)to(5.3)describetheelectricalbehaviorofthebulkorquantumwell
semiconductordevices. Poisson’sequation(Equation5.1)governstheelectrostatic
potential and the continuity equations (Equations (5.2)-(5.3)), govern the carrier
concentrations.
ff
These di erential equations are discretized as described in the next section. The
resulting set of equations is coupled and nonlinear. Consequently, there is no
method to solve the equations in one direct step. Instead, solutions must be
obtained by a nonlinear iteration method, starting from some initial guess. The
solutionmethodsaredetailedinsubsection6.1.3,andthechoiceofinitialguessis
explainedinsubsection6.1.4.


=== PAGE 114 ===
112 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
6.1.2 Discretization
To solve the device equations on a computer, they must be discretized on a sim-
ulation grid. That is, the continuous functions of the PDE’s are represented by
ff
vectorsoffunctionvaluesatthenodes,andthedi erentialoperatorsarereplaced
ff
by suitable di erence operators. Instead of solving for four unknown functions
(potential, electron and hole concentrations, and the electron or hole energy), the
simulatorsolvesfor3Nor4Nunknownnumbers,dependingonthemodelchoice,
whereNisthenumberofgridpoints.
ff
The key to discretizing the di erential operators on a general triangular grid is
the box method [10]. Each equation is integrated over a small polygon enclosing
each node, yielding 4N nonlinear algebraic equations for the unknown potential,
concentrations and the wave amplitude. The integration equates the flux into the
polygon with the sources and sinks inside it, so that conservations of current and
electricfluxarebuiltintothesolution.
The integrals involved are performed on a triangle by triangle basis, leading to a
simpleandelegantwayofhandlinggeneralsurfacesandboundaryconditions. In
thiscasetheintegralissimplyreplacedbyasummationoftheintegrandevaluated
atthenodemultipliedbytheareasurroundingit.
In the case of the continuity equations, the carrier fluxes must be evaluated with
ff
care; the classic finite di erence formulas are modified as first demonstrated by
ScharfetterandGummel(SG-formula)in1969[11]. Fromtheuser’spointofview,
thediscretizationiscompletelyautomaticandnointerventionisrequired.
Forthehydrodynamicmodel,theSG-formulafordiscretizationmustbemodified.
ThedetailsareworkedoutintheAppendix.
6.1.3 Newton’s method
ff
We discuss the numerical solution of drift-di usion equations. In Newton’s
method, all of the variables in the problem are allowed to change during each
iteration, and all of the coupling between variables is taken into account. Due to
this,theNewtonalgorithmisverystable,andthesolutiontimeisnearlyindepen-
dentofbiasconditions.
The basic algorithm is a generalization of the Newton-Raphson method for the
rootofasingleequation. Equations(5.1)–(5.3)canbewrittenas:
F
j (Vj1,
E
j1,
E
j1
)
=
0
,
(6.1)
v fn fp
F
j (Vj1,
E
j1,
E
j1
)
=
0
,
(6.2)
n fn fp
F
j (Vj1,
E
j1,
E
j1
)
=
0
,
(6.3)
p fn fp


=== PAGE 115 ===
6.1NumericalTechniques 113
where jrunsfrom1toN,and j1includes jitselfplusitssurroundingmeshpoints.
ffi
Equations(6.1)to(6.3)representatotalnumberof3Nequations,whichissu cient
tosolvefor3N variables: (V1,E1 ,E1 ,V2,E2 ,E2 ,...,VN,EN ,EN).
fn fp fn fp fn fp
Oncetheequationsarediscretizedintheaboveform,standardNewtontechniques
canbeusedtosolveforthem. TheseinvolvetheevaluationoftheJacobianmatrix
to linearize Equations (6.1) to (6.3), followed by a linear solver (involving LU
factorizationofthematrix)andfinally,nonlineariterationtogetthefinalsolution.
Since the Jacobian matrix is sparse, sparse matrix techniques are used to improve
thecomputationspeed.
The major acceleration of a Newton iteration is the Newton-Richardson method,
whereby the Jacobian matrix is only refactored when necessary. When it is not
necessary to factorize, the iterative method using the previous factorization is
employed. The iterative method is extremely fast provided the previous factor-
ization is reasonable. Frequently the Jacobian need only be factorized only once
or twice per bias point using the Newton-Richardson method, as opposed to the
twentytothirtytimesrequiredintheconventionalNewtonmethod. Thedecision
to refactor is made on the basis of the decrease per step of the maximum error
ff
of both the equation residuals and the variable di erences. This mechanism has
beenautomatedwithintheprogramandnouserinterventionisneeded.
6.1.4 Initial guess and adaptive bias stepping
Several types of initial guess solutions are used in the simulator. The first is the
simplechargeneutralassumptionusedtoobtainthefirst(equilibrium)biaspoint.
For the wave equation, the guess solution is a delta function at the center of the
activeregion. Thisisthestartingpointofanydevicesimulation.
Anylatersolutionwithappliedbiasneedsaninitialguessofsometype,obtained
by modifying one or two previous solution(s). When only one previous solution
is available, the solution currently loaded is used as the initial guess, modified
by setting the applied bias at the contact points. The same is true for the wave
ff
equation. Whentwoprevioussolutionswithtwodi erentbiasesareavailable,itis
possibletoobtainabetterinitialguessbyextrapolatingthetwoprevioussolutions
All of these steps are automated within the program and no user intervention is
needed.
AschematicofthebiasingstrategyisgiveninFigure6.1.
As in any Newton method, convergence strongly depends on the wise choice of
the initial guess solution. In principle, the Newton nonlinear iteration should
always converge as long as the initial guess is close enough to the solution. The
closertheinitialguessistothesolution,thefewernonlineariterationsarerequired


=== PAGE 116 ===
114 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
Equilibrium/Initial Solution
Update Current/Voltage Bias
Bias step reduction
Frequently-Updated
Wave Equation Solver
All No
Solvers Convergent &
Consistent
Yes
Figure6.1: Flowdiagramofhowthesimulatorperformsatypicalsimulation.
to reach convergence. The program takes this fact into account and implements
anadaptivemethodtocontrolthebiasstepafterthesuccessfulconvergenceofthe
previoussolution.
Assuming that the previous solution takes K number of iterations for a bias
1
∆
step of V to reach convergence and the user believes (by experience) that the
1
∆
optimal number of iterations should be K , the current bias step V is adjusted
0 2
∆ = ∆ /
to V V K K . In this way an optimal step can be determined such that the
2 1 0 1
nonlinear Newton iteration is controlled to converge within K iterations. Again
0
thisprocedureiscompletelyautomatedfortheuser.
One common cause of convergence problems in a Newton method is oscillations
in the solution. This usually occurs when the initial guess is poor and the solver
overshoots the solution. In order to prevent this, a damping value has been
implementedwhichpreventsthesolvertochangethesolutiontoomuchbetween
successive iterations. This value is defined in the newton_par statement. A
ff
small damping value will damp the oscillations e ectively but may cause slower
convergence. A large value allows faster convergence when the initial guess is
poorbutcarriesalargerriskofoscillations.
Another important topic for the Newton solver is the choice of solver variables:
pleaserefertosection4.7fordetails.


=== PAGE 117 ===
6.1NumericalTechniques 115
6.1.5 Transient simulation
ff
The method used to discretize the di erential equations in time is the backward
Eulermethod. Itsbasicapproximationisthefollowingequation:
∂ − −∆
S S(t) S(t t)
= .
(6.4)
∂ ∆
t t
This method has the advantages of being highly stable and recovers the steady
∆ → ∞
statesolutioninthelimit t .
Strictlyspeaking,thesimulationsystemhasmorethan5setsofequationswhenthe
trapdynamicequation(Equation(5.11))isalsoincludedinatransientsimulation.
However, this equation is only dependent on local variables and can be solved
beforethemajorNewtonstepinvolvingallmeshpoints.
Once all the equations are discretized in terms of solution of the previous time
step, one cantreatthe solution of the presenttime step usingthe same method as
. .
for the steady state solution, ie one can linearize the discretized equations and
useNewton’smethodtosolvethem.
6.1.6 Mesh issues
Correct allocation of the grid is a crucial issue in device simulation. The number
of nodes in the grid (N) has a direct influence on the simulation time, where the
numberofarithmeticoperationsnecessarytoachieveasolutionisproportionalto
Np wherepusuallyvariesbetween1.5and2.
ff ff
Because the di erent parts of a device have very di erent electrical and optical
behavior,itisusuallynecessarytoallocateafinegridtosomeregionsandacoarse
grid to others. Whenever possible, it is desirable not to allow the fine grid in
some regions to spill into regions where it is unnecessary, in order to maintain a
reasonablesimulationtime. Formoremeshallocationsuggestions,pleasereferto
sections4.5and4.6.
Thefirststepinmeshgenerationistospecifythedeviceboundariesandtheregion
boundaries for each material. The program uses triangles and trapezoids as the
basic building blocks to describe an arbitrary device. Furthermore, the edge of
eachpolygoncanbebenttothedesiredshape.
Thebasicoperationinthemeshgeneratoraftertheboundarieshavebeendefined
is to draw lines parallel to the edges of the polygons (see Figure 6.2). This way
oneobtains,smallertrapezoidswhichcanbebisectedintotwotriangles(thebasic
elementsinthefiniteelementmethod).
Another basic operation is doubling the mesh density in a specified region as
shown in the example of Figure 6.2. This is accomplished by drawing a new line


=== PAGE 118 ===
116 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
d2
d1
Figure 6.2: Schematic for the basic operations in the mesh generator. Two mesh
linesinthed direction,areusedtodoublethemeshnearthecenterofthepolygon.
2
betweentheoldmeshlines. Repeatingthisoperation,onecanmanuallygenerate
ameshwithanyvariationofmeshdensities.
Thesimulatorhasprovidedanotherpracticalapproachtoautomaticmeshgener-
ation and refinement. The mesh is refined according to the variation of specified
physical quantities. For example, in a case where the potential variation between
two adjacent nodes is greater than a value specified by the user, the program will
automatically allocate additional mesh points between the two nodes. More de-
tail can be found in the description of the statement refine_mesh in the reference
section.
6.2 The Cylindrical Coordinate System
6.2.1 Introduction
Since many devices are fabricated with cylindrical symmetry (e.g. VCSELs, pho-
todetectors), it is a good idea to establish a cylindrical coordinate system for
device simulation. By making use of the rotational symmetry, we can reduce the
three-dimensional coordinate system to a two-dimensional one. To do so, we
ff
firstconsiderourdi erentialequationsystemsunderageneralcoordinatesystem.
Then,weapplythetheorytothecylindricalsystem.


=== PAGE 119 ===
6.2TheCylindricalCoordinateSystem 117
6.2.2 Somegeneralconsiderationsforanarbitrarycoordinatesys-
tem
ff
Ourpurposeistore-writethedrift-di usionequation,usuallywrittenincartesian
coordinates,(x,y,z),inthenewcoordinatesystem(q ,q ,q )whichareorthogonal
1 2 3
to each other. We start by considering a small distance along each of the three
coordinates: s
! ! !
∂ x 2 ∂ y 2 ∂ z 2
= , = + + .
ds H dq H (6.5)
j j j j ∂ ∂ ∂
q q q
1 2 3
Thenthegradientofascalarvariableuisgivenby:
∂ ∂ ∂
1 u 1 u 1 u
∇ = + +
u e e e (6.6)
∂ 1 ∂ 2 ∂ 3
H q H q H q
1 1 2 2 3 3
wheree isusedtodenotetheunitvectorforeachofthenewcoordinates.
j
∇·
Letusderivetheexpressionforthedivergence, AofanarbitraryvectorA. We
+ +
considerasmallvolumedefinedwithinfromq toq dq ,q toq dq ,andq to
1 1 1 2 2 2 3
+ +
q dq . Theout-goingflux(A)thoughthesurfacesatq andq dq ofthissmall
3 3 1 1 1
volumeisgivenby:
∂
| − | =
(A 1 H 2 H 3 ) q1 +dq1 dq 2 dq 3 (A 1 H 2 H 3 ) q1 dq 2 dq 3 ∂
q
(A 1 H 2 H 3 )dq 1 dq 2 dq 3 (6.7)
1
+
Similarly,thefluxthroughsurfacesatq andq dq isgivenby:
2 2 2
∂
(A H H )dq dq dq (6.8)
∂ 2 3 1 1 2 3
q
2
+
andthefluxthroughsurfacesatq andq dq isgivenby:
3 3 3
∂
(A H H )dq dq dq (6.9)
∂ 3 1 2 1 2 3
q
3
The divergence is defined as the the total out-going flux divided by the volume
underconsideration:
" #
∂ ∂ ∂
1
∇· = + +
A (H H A ) (H H A ) (H H A ) (6.10)
∂ 2 3 1 ∂ 3 1 2 ∂ 1 2 3
H H H q q q
1 2 3 1 2 3
6.2.3 Cylindrical coordinate system
, , ,θ,
The relation between the old (x y z ) and the new coordinate system (r z ) is
1 1 1 r
givenby:
= θ
x rcos
1


=== PAGE 120 ===
118 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
= θ
y rsin
1
=
z z
1 r
(6.11)
To avoid confusion with the (x,y,z) system used in our simulation software, we
,
have used a new set of symbols here. In our simulator, x y are the lateral and
verticalcoordinatesofa2Dplaneandzisadepthcoordinateusedtostackplanes.
Inthecylindricalsystem,thez axisisusuallynormaltothelayersandcorresponds
r
to ysothatrcorrespondstox.
Itiseasytofindthat:
= , = , = .
H
r
1 Hθ r H
z
1 (6.12)
Therefore,thegradientisgivenby:
∂ ∂ ∂
u 1 u u
∇ = + +
u
∂
e
r ∂θ
eθ
∂
e
z
(6.13)
r r z
r
andthedivergenceisgivenby:
" #
∂ ∂ ∂
1
∇· = + +
A
∂
(rA
r
)
∂θ
(Aθ)
∂
(rA
z
) (6.14)
r r z
r
or
∂ ∂ ∂
1 1
∇· = + +
A
∂
(rA
r
)
∂θ
Aθ
∂
A
z
(6.15)
r r r z
r
6.2.4 Application to devices with cylindrical symmetry
∂
For device with cylindrical symmetry, yields zero. The operators of gradient
∂θ
anddivergencebecome:
∂ ∂
u u
∇ = +
u e e (6.16)
∂ r ∂ z
r z
r
" #
∂ ∂
1
∇· = +
A (rA ) (rA ) (6.17)
∂ r ∂ z
r r z
r
Therefore it is easy to see that in the cylindrical system, all we need to do is to
replaceAbyrAandmultiply 1 infrontofthedi ff erentialoperators.
r
ff
Ournexttaskistoconvertthenewdi erentialequationintoasuitablediscretiza-
tion scheme for the cylindrical system. Let us recall how we discretize the drift-
ff
di usion equation in the old coordinate system. We evaluate the gradient (the
electric field or the current density vector) for each boundary of the finite box
which we createfor the neighboring elements. We then sum up the total flux and


=== PAGE 121 ===
6.33DModelinginSemiconductors 119
divide it by the area of the finite box. In the new system, we need to multiply the
fluxbyrwhichisevaluatedattheboundarypoint. Wealsodividethetotalfluxby
the area of the finite box and by r evaluated at the center of the box (or the center
point).
Itisobviousthatweshouldkeepinmindthatthemissingdimensionisnolonger
infinite but has rotational symmetry. For example, we need to integrate current
π
densityoverthe2 radianstogetthetotalcurrent.
6.3 3D Modeling in Semiconductors
6.3.1 Introduction
Computational resources have always been at a premium so that historically,
TCADmodelswerefirstdevelopedin1Dand2D.MostoftheCrosslighttoolshave
been developed along the same lines, relying on a triangle-based finite element
method. This is naturally a 2D approach, with the 1D case approximated as a
ffi
singlecolumnoftriangles. However,computingpowerhasincreasedsu ciently
that3Dsimulationisnowwithinthereachofmostordinarycomputerusers.
Someoutstandingissuesmustberesolvedtoextendthesolverfrom2Dto3D:
• /
The user input interface should be a natural extension of a 2D simulation.
All material macros in 2D should be usable in 3D. All physical models and
boundaryconditionsmustbeextendableto3D.
•
A useful 3D simulation should be able to handle geometry and material
variationinthez-dimensioneasily.
•
Smartmemorymanagementschememustbedevelopedsothatthe3Dpack-
agecanberunonanythingfromalaptoptoasupercomputer.
ffi
We have successfully overcome most of these di culties and created an option
for 3D modeling. We call this capability “3D-Current Flow” or “3D-Flow” since
it allows current to flow both in all three dimensions. We will explain the design
ideasbehindthismodelinthefollowingsubsections.
6.3.2 From 2D to 3D
While surface meshing of 3D objects is well-understood and used in applications
such as ray tracing & computer graphics, the generation of volumetric mesh is
more complex and still the subject of intense research by many groups. Work


=== PAGE 122 ===
120 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
along these lines generally involves generating tetrahedral elements, which can
ffi
be di cult to do properly: algorithms often struggle to prevent the creation of
“slivers” which have poor aspect ratios and can connect non-neighboring points
[12].
However, we already have a two-dimensional mesh generation and refinement
system which works very well for TCAD applications. It is natural to try extend
thissystemasfaraswecanandadaptitto3Dsimulations.
As usual, we identify the parallel cross sections of a device that have the most
,
variationinphysicalvariablesanddefinethemasx yplanes. Withintheseplanes,
weusethesame2Dmeshgenerationroutinesasbefore. Thezdirectionwillhavea
relativelyslowervariationandcanbemoresparselymeshedtoreducetheoverall
number of mesh points: every z mesh point will be accompanied by a 2D mesh
plane.
For example, a ridge waveguide laser would use the waveguide cross-section as
,
thex ydirectionandthezaxiswouldbethelongitudinalpropagationaxis. Onthe
,
other hand, an LED with complex electrode shapes would define the x y planes
to be parallel to the electrodes and the z axis would be perpendicular to the QW
layers. Inacylindricalsystem,3Dsimulationsimplyalackofrotationalsymmetry
, , θ
andthe x y(orr z )planeswouldstacktogetherinthe direction.
r
6.3.3 3D structure and material input
A3Dsimulationin.solisalwaysdefinedbyusingthe3d_solution_methodstate-
=
ment with the option 3d_flow yes. Other options can also be added to control
the way the mesh planes connect to each other as will be explained later in this
chapter.
Thenextstepoftheinputistodefineregionsthathavethesamematerialproper-
ties and composition. These are called ‘segment” or “z-segment” and are defined
by the z_structure statement. A segment can have multiple mesh planes: these
will share the same material properties such as bandgap and doping but physi-
cal variables such as potential and carrier concentrations are allowed to change
betweenplanes.
To define a 3D volume, at least 2 mesh planes must be defined. However, at least
3 mesh planes must be present to get a variation along the z-axis. Segments con-
taining a single mesh plane are allowed but must have zero thickness: additional
planesandsegmentswillbeneededtodefinea3Dvolume.
After all the z_structure statements have been issued, multiple load_mesh state-
mentsmustbeissued. Eachofthesestatementsmustusethezseg_numparameter
to identify the segment they belong to. In the special case where there is only a
=
singlesegment,thiscanbeomittedandzseg_num 1willbeassumed.


=== PAGE 123 ===
6.33DModelinginSemiconductors 121
After the mesh has been loaded, the material properties for each segments must
be defined. This must be done inside blocks bracketed by begin_zmater ...
end_zmater. These blocks must also be numbered by zseg_num with the ex-
=
ception of the case with a single segment: in this case, zseg_num 1 will be
assumedandthe_zmaterstatementscanbeomitted.
Materialpropertiesthatneedbedefinedinthiswayinclude:
•
materialdeclarations: load_macroanddefine_material
•
activeregiondeclarations: active_regandget_active_layer
•
dopingstatements
•
contactdefinitions
Note that for material declarations, a macro should be loaded only once, in the
segmentwhereamaterialfirstappears. Furtheroccurrencesofthismaterialshould
invokedefine_materialinsteadofload_macro.
Justasmaterialscanreoccurbetweensegments,socancontactsthesameboundary
conditions applies everywhere and the electrode current is also summed up for
all segments. If each segment is to be biased independently from the other, then
ff
di erent contact numbers must be used. For example, it is possible for a tunable
DBR laser to have a shared bottom electrode (#1) with split top contacts for the
gain(#2),tuning(#3)andDBR(#4)segments.
The2D.layerfilescanbeusedina3Dsimulationtofacilitatethisinput: the.mater
and.dopingfilesitgeneratescanbeincludedinsidethe_zmaterblocks. However,
when processed by itself, a layer file will always number materials 1,2,3,... as it
encountersthemwhichcancauseconflictsbetweensegments. Toavoidthis,make
suretousetheprevious_layerstatementtorefertotheprecedingsegment’s.layer
file: thiswillfixnumberingissuesandwillalsodetectmaterialsthathavealready
beendeclaredsoitwillissuedefine_materialstatementswhereappropriate.
However,contactsineach2Dlayerfileshouldbenumberedaccordingtothefinal
3Dstructureandwhetherornottheywillbesharedbetweensegments.
6.3.4 3D mesh generation
As explained above, the three-dimensional mesh consists of a series of two-
dimensional mesh planes stacked together. The position of these mesh planes
is determined by the length of the segments and the number of planes that have
been assigned. This number must be assigned manually by the user, just like the
numberofmeshpointsinacolumnorlayer.


=== PAGE 124 ===
122 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
Whenasegmenthasmultipleplanes,therewillusuallybeplanesatthebeginning
and end of the segment. If there are multiple segments, this can cause a problem
since two mesh planes cannot exist in the same z position. The software has two
ways of dealing with this, depending on the value of the xy_compatible_mesh
parameterin3d_solution_method:
•
Ifsetto“no”(thedefault),meshplanesoneithersideofthesegmentbound-
arywillbeshiftedbyasmallvalue.
•
If set to “yes”, then one of conflicting the planes will be eliminated and no
shiftingisrequired.
=
Care should be taking when using xy_compatible_mesh yes. If there is a het-
erojunction at a segment boundary, then eliminating the extra plane can have
disastrousconsequencesonconvergence. Justlikethe2Dcase,thecloselyspaced
meshpointsoneithersideofthejunctionareneededtogetconvergence.
For the other planes inside a segment, their position can be also be controlled via
mesh point ratios: the z_structure statement supports a feature similar to that of
put_meshinthe2Dmeshgenerator.
6.3.5 Discretization in 3D
Asexplained insubsection6.1.2,every meshpoint hasa polygonassociated with
it. To connect mesh points between planes, we extrude this polygon in either
direction to the midpoint of the preceding and following mesh plane. This forms
ff
prism-like 3D objects that are di erent from the traditional tetrahedral elements
usedin3DFEM.
Fluxconservationisconsistentwiththeboxmethoddescribedearlier: connecting
mesh points are assigned part of the flux based on the overlap between the two
extruded polygons. A projection is used to account for the case where the two
meshplanesarenotparallel.
6.3.6 Taper structures
To explain how tapers are handled in the software, we need to introduce the
conceptof“taperlines”asillustratedinFig. 6.3.
ConsiderastructurewithataperextendingfrompointsA1-B1onsegment1toA2-
B2onsegment2. Wedefinea“taperline”A1-C1onsegment1andacorresponding
taperlineA2-C2(pointC2ishiddenbehindthefigure). Thesetaperlinesareused


=== PAGE 125 ===
6.33DModelinginSemiconductors 123
Segment 2
A2
B2
A1
B1
C1
Segment 1
ff
Figure6.3: Schematicoftaperlinesbetweentwodi erentsegments.
to extend a particular boundary from one plane to the corresponding boundary
ontheother.
Thiswilldivide themesh oneitherside ofthe taperlineand forcemesh pointsto
connectacrossplaneswithoutcrossingthetaperlines: thisisespeciallyimportant
/
when dealing with semiconductor insulator interfaces. As a result, the extrusion
processdescribedabovenolongerfollowsthezaxis: itfollowstaperlines.
To define a taper in .sol, two segments must be defined with the taper_pointsj
parameters: multiple sets of taper points can be used to define multiple taper
lines. The two segments must not overlap and the taper region will extend in the
empty space between the last plane of the first segment and the first plane of the
secondsegment.
Note that a very common misconception is that material properties in tapers
are linearly interpolated between planes: for the electrical calculations, this is
completely untrue. Tapers only control the connectivity between mesh planes:
actualmeshplanesmustbeassignedatvariouszpositionsinordertosamplethe
variationofphysicalproperties.
6.3.7 3D simulator control
Oncethe3Dmaterialdataandmeshhasbeencreated,a3Dsimulationisrelatively
straightforward. The.solfileworksthesameasbeforeandbiascanstillbeapplied
to specified electrodes. When the Newton solver is called, all mesh planes will
ff
be solved simultaneously to obtain the 3D solution. The main di erence is that


=== PAGE 126 ===
124 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION
/
2D simulations use currents in A m units (since the z depth is not known). A
3D simulation, just like a cylindrical simulation, can compute the full current in
Amperes.
For simulations with split contacts between segments, we advise caution when
biasing as you may inadvertently create a short between neighboring electrodes
in certain situations. This can usually be avoided by biasing multiple electrodes
simultaneously.
For plotting results, the .plt file can still be used: plotting statements such as
lplot_xy, lplot_xyz, vplot_xy, etc... can be used to view 3D data. CrosslightView
canalsoplotdatafrom3Dsimulations.
6.4 3D modeling in PICS3D
PICS3D adds an extra complication to the 3D modeling. As will be discussed in
Chapter 16 and Sec. 18.4, the lasing behavior is controlled by an additional set
of equations which depend on the longitudinal round-trip gain (RTG) 1. These
equations are based on the propagation of the optical mode in the cavity and are
mostoftenwrittenusingtransfermatrixformalism.
As such, RTG evaluation requires gain and index profiles at various points in the
cavity. These points can be considered an “optical mesh” and do not necessarily
matchthepositionoftheelectricalmeshplanesdescribedintheprevioussection.
Theopticalmeshalwaysfollowsthedirectionofthelightpropagationinthecavity
so by the usual convention, it always follows the z-direction. For edge emitting
devices like DFB lasers, the z-direction is defined as the direction in which x-y
mesh planes are stacked: we will assume we are dealing with such a device for
therestofthissection.
With this in mind, we can consider how to evaluate the RTG equations. The
problem here is one of consistency: to calculate the propagation, the gain profile
is needed, which requires knowing the local photon density and the associated
longitudinal hole burning. However, the photon density itself is only known by
calculatingtheRTG.
In older versions of PICS3D, the solution to this problem was to use a quasi-3D
approach and tabulate the gain at various photon densities. The RTG equations
were then solved separately from the main Newton solver to get the photon
density and longitudinal gain profile. However, this method sometimes led to
convergenceissues.
As of version 2008, PICS3D fully couples the RTG equations and solves them
1Thisdoesnotapplytothe2Dsimulationsthatusethesimplerphotonrateequationfromthe
LASTIPmodel


=== PAGE 127 ===
6.43DmodelinginPICS3D 125
in the main Newton solver. The RTG equations are still use the “optical mesh”
but the modal gain and index for the propagation are directly interpolated from
the electrical mesh at every iteration of the Newton solver. This means that all
edge-emitting PICS3D simulations must be done in full 3D. In these simulations,
PICS3Dreliesontheabilitytosolvemultipleelectricalmeshplanessimultaneously
to interpolate the gain and index profiles onto the optical mesh. This increased
self-consistency makes the model fully 3D and greatly increases the convergence
andstabilityofthesoftware.
Asaresult,alledge-emittinglasersimulationsinPICS3Dmustusethe3d_solution_method
=
statement with 3d_flow yes. However, the z_connect option is available to turn
ff
on or o the electrical coupling between mesh planes: only the ability to solve
multiple mesh planes simultaneously is actually required for the 3D simulation.
ff
Inmanydevices,thelongitudinalcurrentcontributionisnegligiblesoturningo
theelectricalconnectionbetweenmeshplaneshasafewadvantages:
•
it can often result in a smaller and more stable sparse matrix since the con-
nectingelementsbetweenplaneswillbeleftoutofthesparsematrixentirely
•
it can avoid unintentionally shorting contacts between segments in certain
biasconfigurations
6.4.1 3D VCSEL modeling in PICS3D
For cylindrical devices such as VCSELs, the z-axis is as defined in Sec. 6.2. This
means that the propagation is normal to the QW layers and the optical mesh is
perpendicular to what is used in edge-emitting devices. In addition, rotational
symmetryimpliesthatonlyasinglemeshplaneisrequiredtodoafull3Dmodel:
3d_solution_methodisnotrequiredformostcases.
However,thesamebasicprinciplesofthecoupledRTGmethodstillapply: optical
properties are derived from the electrical mesh points and used to calculate the
mode propagation. The coupled RTG equations are solved in the main Newton
solveralongsidetherestoftheelectricalproblem.


=== PAGE 128 ===
126 NUMERICALTECHNIQUESAND3DSIMULATION


=== PAGE 129 ===
hapter
C 7
AC ANALYSIS AND HIGH
FREQUENCY PARAMETERS
For many users of Crosslight simulation software, assessment of high frequency
performance of their devices is a key reason of the modeling. Analysis of high
frequency behavior of a semiconductor device is more than solving the wave
propagation in a passive medium. The response of a semiconductor to high
frequency modulation is rather complex and requires special transformation of
ff
the drift-di usion equations. This chapter gives an outline of the AC analysis
theoryforsemiconductordevices.
7.1 Theory
7.1.1 Introduction
AC small signal analysis for semiconductor equations was first developed by
Laux [13] in 1985. A modified version of this technique including the deep level
trap model was later developed by Li and Dutton [14]. We shall follow their
formulation in this section. We derive the formulas in subsection 7.1.2. The
numericaltechniquesaregiveninsection7.2.


=== PAGE 130 ===
128 ACANALYSISANDHIGHFREQUENCYPARAMETERS
7.1.2 Basic formulas
Were-writethebasicsemiconductorequationsandtrapdynamicmodelasfollows:
!
X
ϵ ϵ
−∇· 0 dc∇ = − + + − − + δ −
V n p N (1 f ) N f N ( f ) (7.1)
D D A A tj j tj
q
j
X
∂ n ∂ f
∇· − tj − − − + = + D
J R R R R G (t) N (7.2)
n n sp st au opt ∂ t D ∂ t
j
X
∂ ∂
p f
∇· + tj + + + − = − + A
J R R R R G (t) N (7.3)
p p sp st au opt ∂ t A ∂ t
j
∂
f
tj − tj = tj
R R N (7.4)
n p tj ∂ t
where:
tj = − −
R c nN (1 f ) c n N f (7.5)
n nj tj tj nj 1j tj tj
tj = − −
R c pN f c p N (1 f ) (7.6)
p pj tj tj pj 1j tj tj
The basic variables involved in the AC analysis are V, the potential; n and p,
the electron and hole concentrations, respectively; and f , the trap occupancy of
tj
the jth trap species. To simplify our derivation, we use the following notation to
representEquations(7.1)to(7.4):
, , , =
F (V U U f ) 0 (7.7)
1 n p tj !
∂ n ∂ f ∂ U
, , , = + D n
F (V U U f ) N (7.8)
2 n p tj ∂ D∂ ∂
U U t
n n !
∂ p ∂ f ∂ U
, , , = − + A p
F (V U U f ) N (7.9)
3 n p tj ∂ A∂ ∂
U U t
p p
∂
f
, , = tj
H (U U f ) N (7.10)
j n p tj tj ∂
t
where we have changed the variables n and p into U and U , their respective
n p
normalized quasi-Fermi levels. For the electron or hole transport equations (F
2
or F ) the first term on the right hand side represents
∂n
or
∂p
, giving the time
3 ∂t ∂t
dependence of electron or hole concentration; the second term gives the time-
dependentchangeincarrierconcentrationassociatedwiththetrapdynamics.
Ingeneral,theACinputsignal(voltage)andsolutionvariablesareexpressedas:
ξ = ξ +∆ξ eiωt
(7.11)
0


=== PAGE 131 ===
7.1Theory 129
ξ ∆ξ
where istheDCsolutionand isthecomplexACsolutionunderamodulation
0
ω = π ξ
frequency 2 f. This form can represent any variable of the system (V, U ,
n
U ,or f )asacomplexsolution.
p tj
ξ
By substituting back into the trap equation and doing a Taylor series expansion
tofirstorderattheDCsolution,Equation(7.4)becomes:
∂ ∂ ∂
H H H
j∆ + j∆ + j∆ = ω∆
U U f N i ftj (7.12)
∂ n ∂ p ∂ tj tj
U U f
n p tj
∆
Solvingtheabovefor f gives:
tj
! !
∂
H
∂
H
∂
H
−1
∆ = j∆ + j∆ ω− j
f U U N i (7.13)
tj ∂ n ∂ p tj ∂
U U f
n(cid:18) p (cid:19) (cid:18) tj (cid:19)
−
∂Hj ∂Hj
+
i
ω
N
∆
U
−
∂Hj ∂Hj
+
i
ω
N
∆
U
∆ f =
∂Un ∂ftj tj n
(cid:18)
∂Up
(cid:19)
∂ftj tj p
(7.14)
tj
(N ω )2 +
∂Hj 2
tj ∂ftj
whichcanberewrittenas:
∆ = ω ∆ + ω ∆
f F ( ) U F ( ) U (7.15)
tj n n p p
By similarly expanding the Poison equation and electron and hole continuity
equationsasafirstorderTaylorSeriesandthensubstitutingtheaboveexpression
∆
for f ,weobtainthefollowingequations:
tj
∂ ∂ ∂ ∂
F F F F
1∆ + 1 ∆ + 1 ∆ + 1 ∆ + ∆
V U U (F U F U )
∂ ∂ n ∂ p ∂ n n p p
V U U f
n p tj
=
0 (7.16)
∂ ∂ ∂ ∂
F F F F
2∆ + 2 ∆ + 2 ∆ + 2 ∆ + ∆
V U U (F U F U )
∂ ∂ n ∂ p ∂ n n p p
V U U f
n p t j !
∂ n ∂ f
= + D ω∆
N i U (7.17)
∂ D∂ n
U U
n n
∂ ∂ ∂ ∂
F F F F
3∆ + 3 ∆ + 3 ∆ + 3 ∆ + ∆
V U U (F U F U )
∂ ∂ n ∂ p ∂ n n p p
V U U f
n p t j !
∂ ∂
p f
= − + A ω∆
N i U (7.18)
∂ A∂ p
U U
p p
×
Werewritethese3equationsin3 3matrixformas:
+ ξ =
(J D) 0 (7.19)


=== PAGE 132 ===
130 ACANALYSISANDHIGHFREQUENCYPARAMETERS
foreachmeshpointinthesemiconductor,wheretheJmatrixorJacobiancontains
thefirst3termsineachequationwhileDcontainstheremainingtermsconcerning
thetrapsandtheright-handsideoftheequation.
ξ = ∆ ,∆ ,∆
Using this notation with ( V U U ) the D matrix at each point is of the
n p
form:
0 1
D = B B B B B B B B B B B @ 0 0 0 − ( ∂ ∂ U n n + N D ∂ ∂ ∂ F F f ∂ ∂ t 1 3 j U f F F D n n ) ( ( i ω ω ω ) ) + ∂ ∂F ft 2 j F n ( ω ) − ( − ∂p + N ∂ ∂ ∂ ∂ F F f f t t 1 2 j j ∂ F F fA p p ( ( ) ω ω i ω ) ) + ∂F3F ( ω ) C C C C C C C C C C C A (7.20)
∂ftj n ∂Up A∂Up ∂ftj p
Considertheboundarypointsandtheinternalmeshpointsseparatelysothat:
→ +
J J J (7.21)
B
and
→ +
D D D (7.22)
B
The matrix equation can then be rewritten in a separated form for internal and
boundarymeshpointsasfollows:
+ ξ+ + ξ =
(J D) (J D ) 0 (7.23)
B B B
∆ ∆ =
AC Dirichlet boundary conditions imply that U and U 0 so that the AC
n p
voltagedriveatthecontacthastheboundarysolution:
0 1
B B B ∆ V B C C C
B C
ξ = B B 0 C C (7.24)
B @ A
0
∆
where V istheappliedACvoltageofonevolt.
B
SincethefirstcolumnintheDmatrixmustbezerothematrixequationbecomes:
+ ξ = − ·ξ ≡
(J D) J B (7.25)
B B
To simplify the numerics, we now wish to write equations involving only real
numbers:
= +
D D iD (7.26)
r i
ξ = ξ + ξ
i (7.27)
r i
Thematrixisthusrewrittenas:
+ + ξ + ξ =
(J D iD)( i ) B (7.28)
r i r i
Byexpandingtherealandimaginaryparts,anewexpandedmatrixcanbewritten:
! ! !
+ − ξ
J D D B
r i r = (7.29)
+ ξ
D J D 0
i r i


=== PAGE 133 ===
7.2NumericaltechniquesinACanalysis 131
7.2 Numerical techniques in AC analysis
Our task has been reduced to solving the expanded matrix equation detailed in
ξ ,ξ
the previous subsection. The AC solution matrix ( ) is easily solved using
r i
the sparse matrix inverter to invert the expanded Jacobian and multiply by the
matrix on the RHS. However, the inversion can be slow because the expanded
+
Jacobian J D is twice the order of original Jacobian matrix obtained from the DC
solution. We use direct solution techniques to perform the matrix inversion so
thatconvergenceisguaranteedforallfrequencies.
In our simulator, the AC analysis is implemented as a post-processor, i.e., the
analysisisdoneaftertheDCsolutionisobtainedfromthemainsolverinputfile(
with.solextension). Thisisdoneintwosteps:
•
The AC analysis matrix is constructed from Jacobian matrix elements used
for DC simulation. To enable export of the additional data from the usual
DCanalysis,weusethemore_outputstatement.
•
The AC analysis is activated by the input file with extension .plt. The input
file must specify which data set (thus the DC bias condition) is used for the
AC analysis. The statement ac_voltage is used to apply a 1V AC signal on
one of the contacts (or electrodes). The resulting AC current data are stored
inanoutputfiledefinedbytheuserforlaterplotting.
•
Once the AC current is calculated, a statement such as plot_ac_curr is used
toplottheresults.
The basic outputs are the complex AC currents at all the electrodes and the AC
current distribution, in response to the applied AC voltage (one volt) at one of
the electrodes. The following important quantities can be extracted from the AC
current:
•
The conductance matrix elements are computed from the real part of the
electrodeACcurrentwithonevoltappliedACbiasatoneoftheelectrodes.
•
The capacitance matrix elements are computed from the imaginary part of
ω
theelectrodeACcurrent,dividedby ,withonevoltappliedACbiasatone
oftheelectrodes.
•
The current gain can be computed from ratio of the AC current magnitudes
between two electrodes, with one volt applied AC bias at one of the elec-
trodes.


=== PAGE 134 ===
132 ACANALYSISANDHIGHFREQUENCYPARAMETERS
I I
1 2
+ TWO-PORT(cid:3) +
V V
1 2
- NETWORK -
Port #1 Port #2
Figure 7.1: Schematics of a general 2-port network. Please note the direction of
currentflow.
•
Thevoltagegainisslightlymorecomplicated. Itmustbedoneintwosteps.
Forexample,wewishtoobtainthevoltagegain
∆V2.
Thismaybewrittenas:
∆V1
∆ ∆ ∆
V I V
2 = 2 × 2
(7.30)
∆ ∆ ∆
V V I
1 1 2
ff
whichmeanswemustapplytheac_voltagecommandtwicetotwodi erent
electrodestoobtaintheindividualratios.
7.3 Two-Port Network Parameters
ffi
Linearnetworks,ornonlinearnetworksoperatingwithsignalssu cientlysmallto
causethenetworkstorespondinalinearmanner,canbecompletelycharacterized
by parameters measured at the network terminals (ports) without regard to the
contentsofthenetworks. Oncetheparametersofanetworkhavebeendetermined,
its behavior in any external environment can be predicted without regard to the
contentsofthenetwork. Weshallintroducesomeuseful2-portparametersinthis
sectionandexplainhowtheyareextractedfromDCsimulations.
A general 2-port network is indicated in Fig. 7.1. Please note that the positive
ff
directionofthecurrentflowisdi erentthaninthesimulatorandall2-portparam-
ff
etersrelatedtocurrentflowdirectionwillbedi erentbyasignfromcurrentflow
calculated from the simulator which assigns a positive sign to all current flowing
outofadevice.


=== PAGE 135 ===
7.4ACPhoto-response 133
In an AC analysis of semiconductor devices, it is common to share one contact
for the input and output. For example, it is often convenient to use the common
emitter configuration in a bipolar transistor. By default, all contacts of a device
ffi
have zero AC voltage bias from a DC simulation. Thus, it is su cient to specify
a single contact as input or output since all other contacts are grounded in AC
voltages. Such a situation is ideal for the computation of the Y-parameters which
aredefinedasfollows(referringtoFig. 7.1).
= +
I Y V Y V
1 11 1 12 2
= +
I Y V Y V (7.31)
2 21 1 22 2
ItisoftenconvenienttoexpresstheY-parametersrelativetothesystemcharacter-
= /
istic admittance Y 1 Z where Z is the system characteristic impedance (often
c c c
settobe50Ohm). Wedenotetherelativeadmittanceusinglowercaselettershere,
= /
forexample, y Y Y .
11 11 c
Based on our discussions in previous sections, the complete set of Y-parameters
can be obtained if we excite the device twice, once at the input and once at the
output contact. Once the Y-parameters are obtained, the important S-parameters
can be computed from the following equations (please refer to any text books on
microwavetheories):
− + +
(1 y )(1 y ) y y )
= 11 22 12 21
s
11 + + −
(1 y )(1 y ) y y
11 22 12 21
−
2y
= 12
s
12 + + −
(1 y )(1 y ) y y
11 22 12 21
−
2y
= 21
s
21 + + −
(1 y )(1 y ) y y
11 22 12 21
+ − +
(1 y )(1 y ) y y
= 11 22 12 21
s (7.32)
22 + + −
(1 y )(1 y ) y y
11 22 12 21
Thetheoriesdiscussedinthissectionstronglysuggestaconvenientwayofstudy-
ing the 2-port parameters: if you wish to understand the S-parameters, always
go back to the Y-parameters which may be easily understood from a simple AC-
voltage excitation of the input or output. Also, a convenient way to check the
correctnessof2-portparametersshouldbetoplottheY-parameterswhichmaybe
comparedwithAC-currentresponsesfromsingle-terminalexcitations,keepingin
ff
mindthesigndi erencementionedearlierinthissection.
7.4 AC Photo-response
InstandardACanalysis,theACsourceisvoltageappliedtooneoftheelectrodes.
The source of perturbation appears as the B vector on the right hand side of

